Covariate shift occurs when the distribution of variables in the training data is different to real-world or testing data. This means that the model may make the wrong predictions once it is deployed, and its accuracy will be significantly lower.You may have heard from various people that data science competitions are a good way to learn data science, but they are not as useful in solving real world data science problems. Why do you think this is the case?

One of the differences lies in the quality of data that has been provided. In Data Science Competitions, the datasets are carefully curated. Usually, a single large dataset is split into train and test file. So, most of the times the train and test have been generated from the same distribution.

But this is not the case when dealing with real world problems, especially when the data has been collected over a long period of time. In such cases, there may be multiple variables / environment changes might have happened during that period. If proper care is not taken then, the training dataset cannot be used to predict anything about the test dataset in a usable manner.

In this article, we will see the different types of problems or Dataset Shift that we might encounter in the real world. Specifically, we will be talking in detail about one particular kind of shift in the Dataset (Covariate shift), the existing methods to deal with this kind of shift and an in depth demonstration of a particular method to correct this shift.The situation where the training input points and test input points follow different. distributions while the conditional distribution of output values given input points is unchanged. is called the covariate shiftvariable is a covariate if it is related to the dependent variable. According to this definition, any variable that is measurable and considered to have a statistical relationship with the dependent variable would qualify as a potential covariate.Researchers found that due to the variation in the distribution of activations from the output of a given hidden layer, which are used as the input to a subsequent layer, the network layers can suffer from covariate shift which can impede the training of deep neural networks.Shifting data is adding a constant k to each member of a data set, where k is a real number. In visual terms, it is lifting the entire distribution of data points and shifting en masse a distance of k.Covariate-effect analysis is the analysis of the effects of a set of covariables (covariates) on a set of response variables.Covariate shift is a specific type of dataset shift often encountered in machine learning. It is when the distribution of input data shifts between the training environment and live environment. Although the input distribution may change, the output distribution or labels remain the same. Covariate shift is also known as covariate drift, and is a very common issue encountered in machine learning. Models are usually trained in offline or local environments on a sample of labelled training data. It’s not unusual for the distribution of inputs in a live and dynamic environment to be different from the controlled training environment.  

Covariate shift can occur gradually over time or suddenly after deployment. In both cases the issue will have an adverse effect on the accuracy of the model. The algorithms will have been trained to map input to output data, and may not recognise input features on a different distribution. This means the model may be less accurate, or completely ineffective. It is a major consideration in machine learning as it means a high performing model on training data may not be accurate once deployed. 

Covariate shift is a common problem faced within the supervised type of machine learning methodology. It will occur when a model has been trained on a dataset with a distribution which is much different to new datasets. Because the distribution of input variables has shifted, the model may misclassify data points in a live environment. 

Addressing covariate shift is an important consideration within machine learning, so that models can be refitted for better accuracy. This guide will explore the topic of covariate shift, including what it is, why it happens, and how it impacts machine learning. 
